

AWS Global Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Databases
*Migration & Transfer
Network & Content Delivery
*Management & Governance
*Machine Learning
*Analytics
Security, Identity & Compliance
*Desktop & App Streaming

* non-core

Region is a physical location in the world which consists of 2 or more Availability Zones (AZ's)

An AZ is 1+ discrete data centers. Has redundant power, networking and connectivity

Edge locations are endpoints for AWS which are used for caching content. Typically this consists of CloudFront - Amazons CDN

# Edge locations > # AZ > # Regions

VPC - Virtual Private Cloud

Identity Access Management (IAM)
	Users, Groups, Roles, Policies
	Universal (does not apply to regions)
	root account has complete Admin access
	New users have no permissions when first created
	New users given Access Key ID and Secret Access Keys when first created
	Use AKID and SAK to access AWS via APIs and command line
	Only get to view the AKID and SAK once. If they get lost then they will need to be regenerated
	Always setup MFA on root account
	Can create and edit password rotation policies

Simple Storage Service (S3)

Object based (can upload files - 0-5TB). Not suitable for operating systems or Databases.
Unlimited Storage
Universal namespace (for each bucket)
Returns http 200 response for successful uploads
Can protect objects using MFA Delete

Key, Value, Version, Metadata, Subresources(ACLs, Torrent)
Read after write consistency for PUTS of new objects, eventual consistency for Puts or deletes

Tiered Storage
Storage classes - 
	S3 Standard, 
	S3 IA (Infrequently Accessed - lower fee but charge for retrieval),
	S3 One Zone IA (like IA, but with less resilience), S3 Intelligent Tiering (moves files from S3 standard to S3 IA based on amount of usage)
	S3 Glacier low cost storage for data archiving.
	S3 Glacier Deep archive - lowest cost, but 12 hour retrieval time


READ S3 FAQS - IT WILL BE IN THE EXAM!!!

S3 charges
	Storage
	Requests
	pricing
	Data transfer pricing
	Transfer Acceleration
	cross region replication

Cross Region replication


Versioning
Static Website hosting
Encryption
Transfer Acceleration

Encryption In Transit (SSL/TLS - https)
Encryption At Rest (encrypted data on device)
	Server Side 

		S3 Managed Keys SSE-S3
		AWS Key Management Service Managed Keys - SSE-KMS
		Server Side Encryption with Customer provided Keys - SSE-C
	Client Side Encryption

S3 stores all versions of an object including writes and deletes
Once enabled, Versioning cannot be disabled - only suspended

Versioning has MFA delete capability so that user have to provide MFA to delete a file

Lifecycle Management automates moving objects between the different storage tiers.
	Can be applied to current and previous versions


Cross Region Replication
	Requires versioning to be enabled on the source and destination bucket
	Existing files are not automatically replicated
	Does _not_ replicate delete markers, or delete versions


S3 Transfer Acceleration
	Uses CloudFront Edge Network to accelerate uploads to S3
		Instead of uploading directly to a bucket, you upload directly to an edge location which then transfers that file to S3.
		Cone via a distinct 's3-accelerate' url
		Remember S3 buckets are _not_ global - they sit in an availability zone

CloudFront
	It is a CDN
	Can be used to deliver entire website including:
		Dynamic
		static
		streaming
		and interactive content
	Uses global network of Edge locations
	Requests are automatically routed to the nearest Edge Location to give the best performance
	Web distribution - Typically for websites 
	RTMP for Media Streaming
	Edge Locations are not _just_ read only - you can write to them too (see S3 Transfer Acceleration)
	Objects are cached for TTL (Time To Live)
	Can clear cached objects but it incurs a charge

CloudFront terms
	Edge Location: A location where content is cached - diverent to an AWS Region/AZ
	Origin: the origin of all the files that the CDN distributes - e.g. S3 Bucket, EC2 instances, Elastic Load Balancer or Route 53
	Distribution: the name given to the CDN that is made up of a collection of Edge Locations
	Invalidations remove objects from CloudFront edge caches - next request for the object will cause Cloudfront to retrieve it from origin. If updating files frequently, then use versioning instead.


SnowBall
	Petabyte scale data transport solutions.
	Used to transfer large amounts of data into and out of AWS
	Snowball is simple, fast, secure and cheap (%20 of cost of high speed internet)
	2 types - 50TB or 80TB
	Multiple layers of security - tamper resistant enclosures - 256 bit encryption and Trsuted Platform Module (TPM)
	Once transfer has been processed and verified, AWS performs software erasure on snowball appliance.

Snowball Edge
	100TB data transfer device with on-board storage and compute capabilities
	Used to move large amounts of data into and out of AWS or as a temp storage tier for large local datasets or to support local workloads in remot or offline locations
	Connects to existing applications using standard storage interfaces
	Streamlines data transfer process and minimizes setup and integration
	Can cluster together to form a local storage tier and process data on-premises, so that applications continue to run even when they are not able to access the cloud


Snowmobile
	Exabyte scale data transfer service
	Used to move extremely large amounts of data to AWS - 100PB per Snowmobile (45ft ruggedized shipping container)
	Makes it easy to move massive volumes of data to the cloud (video, image, data center migration....)
	Fast and cost effective

Snowball can import to and export from S3


AWS Storage Gateway
	Connects an on-premises appliance with cloud based storage to provide Seamless and secure Integration with AWS storage infrastructure
	Enables you to securely store data to the AWS cloud for scalable and cost effective storage
	E.g replicates data to AWS
	Available to download as VM  (VMWare ESXi, or MS Hyper-V)

	File Gateway (NFS & SMB)
		Files stored as objects in S3 buckets accessed through NFS mount point
		Ownership, permissions and timestamps are durably stored in the user-metadata of the object associated with the file

	Volume Gateway (iSCSI) - a 'virtual' hard disk (e.g. mounted as HD volume). Snapshots asynchronously backed up to Amazon EBS (elastic BeanStalk?). Only changed blocks are backed up

		Stored Volumes
			Primary data always stored locally - backed up to AWS. Low latency. Durable off-site backup to AWS S3 in form of Elastic Block Store (EBS) snapshots. (entire dataset)

		Cached Volumes - like stored volumes, but only most frequently accessed data is stored locally. Advantage is that there is less need to scale local infrastructure.

	Gateway Virtual Tape Library(GVTL)
		Archive data in AWS cloud. 
		VTL interface allows you to store data on virtual tape cartridges on your tape gateway.
		Each GVTL is preconfigured with media changer and tape drives which are available to application as iSCSI devices. 
		Supported by NetBackup, Backup Exec, Veeam etc...




S3 summary
	Object based i.e. upload files (0-5TB)
	Unlimited storage
	Files stored in buckets
	Universal namespace. Names must be unique globally
	Not suitable for an OS or DB
	Successful upload returns HTTP 200
	All new buckets are PRIVATE
	Setup access to buckets using 
		Bucket Policies
		ACLs
	S3 Buckets can be configured to create access logs which can be sent to another bucket (even one in another account)

S3 Key Fundamentals
	Key - name of object
	Value - content eg. bytes
	Version Id
	Metadata
	Subresources
		ACLs
		Torrent
	Read after Write consistency for PUTS of new Objects
	Eventual consistency for overwrite PUTS and DELETES (can take time to propagate)
	
S3 Standard
	99.99% availability
	99.999999999 (11 9s) durability 
	Stored redundantly across multiple devices in multiple facilities
	Design to sustain the loss of 2 facilities concurrently

S3 IA (Infrequently Accessed)
	Lower fee than S3 but charged for retrieval

S3 One Zone IA
	When multiple AZ data resilience is not required

S3 Intelligent Tiering
	Optimize costs by automatically moving data to the most cost effective access tier.
	No performance impact or operational overhead

S3 Glacier
	Secure durable, low cost storage
	Retrieval times configurable from minutes to hours

S3 Glacier Deep Archive
	Amazons lowest cost storage class
	Retrieval time of up to 12 hours


Encryption in Transit
	Achieved by SSL/TLS (stops MIM attacks)

Encryption at Rest (server side)
	S3 Managed Keys - SSE-S3
	AWS Key Management Service, Managed Keys - SSE-KMS
	Server Side Enryption With Customer Provided Keys - SSE-C

Client Side Encryption


Cross Region Replication
	Versioning must be enabled on both source and destination buckets
	Regions must differ/be unique
	Files in existing bucket are not replicated automatically
	Subsequent updated files _are_ replicated automatically
	Delete markers are not replicated
	Deleting individual versions or delete markers will not be replicated

NEED TO UNDERSTAND CRR AT HIGH LEVEL!!


Lifecycle Policies
	Automates moving objects between different storage tiers
	Can be used in conjunction with versioning
	Can be applied to current and previous versions


S3 Transfer Acceleration
	Upload to Edge location then use AWS backbone to get to S3 AZ

CloudFront
	Edge location is location where content is cached - separate to an AWS Region/AZ
	Origin - the origin of all the files that the CDN will distribute - S3 Bucket/EC2 Instance/Elastic Load Balancer/ Route53
	Distribution - the name given to the CDN which consists of a collection of edge locations
	Web Distribution - typically used for websites
	RTMP - used for media streaming
	Edge locations are not read only - see transfer acceleration 
	Object are cached for the TTL
	Can clear cached objects but will incur a fee


Snowball
	Big disk for moving data in/out of cloud
	Import to / from S3

Storage Gateway
	File Gateway
		For flat files stored directly on S3
	Volume gateway
		Stored volumes - entire dataset is stored on site and async backup to S3
		Cached Volumes - Entire dataset is on S3 and the most frequently accessed data is cached on site
	Gateway Virtual Tape Library (GVTL)
		Used for backup and uses popular backup applications e.g Netbackup


READ THE S3 FAQ before taking the exam. It comes up A LOT!!!!


EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud)
===========================

Web Service that provides resizable compute capacity

Pricing Model
        On Demand
           fixed rate ph. No commitment
        Reserved
          provides you with a capacity reservation to get a significant discount on hourly charge (terms are 1 or 3 years)
        Spot
          enables you to bid for instance capacity, providing savings if you have flexible start/end times
          If instance is terminated (by AWS) you will not be charged for a partial hour of usage
        Dedicated Hosts
          Physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. Reduce costs by allowing you to use 'server bound' software licences

Termination Protection is _turned off_ by default
On an EBS backed instance the default action is for the root EBS volume to be deleted when the instance is terminated
EBS Root Volumes of DEFAULT AMIs cannot be encryped
Can use a third party tool (e.g. bitlocker) to encrypt root volume, or this can be done when creating AMIs
Additional volumes can be encrypted
         




                  


